
Origin

To understand why my desk is always cluttered and messy,
I first took a google search trip back to mid 14th century to understand where 
the word desk came from. (yes, this was absolutely necessary 
and was in no way an attempt 
to procrastinate cleaning my desk.)

The word desk originates from the word 'desca' meaning 'table to write on'.
As a toddler, perhaps taking this definition to heart I used to scribble 
over all the desks I could find. I abandoned this pursuit later 
when I found the magic of "paper". (It was at this time that I also discovered 
that writing on paper made my pens last longer than a day.)

This led to the unfortunate outcome that my desk was now always cluttered 
with lots and lots of paper, pens, and other stuff that I seldom use. 
When I think about cleaning it up, I usually end up writing a long winded blog 
like this one and never actually get around to cleaning it.

But why does an unorganised, messy desk matter?

Apparently, there are direct and indirect consequences to having a messy desk.
Direct, in the form of frantically searching for a piece of paper 
while your unfortunate caller repeats the phone number for the 3rd time, 
and after finally procuring a scrappy piece of paper 
from the depths of your mess, having to sheepishly ask them to repeat it 
one more time because your pen ran out of ink mid-way.

Indirectly, the effects are far worse…
The good folks at Princeton conducted a research which showed that by having 
a cluttered and disorganised workspace, the brain which naturally favours order 
is being unconsciously put under stress.

In essence, the study showed that a messy desk can lead to anxiety 
and in some cases, cause sleeplessness.
Wow, that makes perfect sense. No wonder I had trouble sleeping on my desk. 
I have noticed that I sleep much better on the bed.
The study also showed that people also procrastinate a lot more 
( hard to believe that people actually do this.. ) 
when they felt overwhelmed by the mess and lack of organisation.
Moreover, people with messy desks are perceived as being less conscientious, 
more neurotic and less agreeable. ( In fact, these people have often 
been reported as arguing that their very messy 
tables are not really messy at all and that they know precisely where everything is…)

A silver lining
But the study also showed that clutter isn't always bad. Messy desks can 
actually make us more creative. A neat ordered environment makes us more 
likely to conform to expectations and play it safe. Therefore by having 
a messier desk you have a tendency to think different and try out new things.
While messy workspaces send negative signals about our work ethic 
and personality, a pristine, clean & organised desk can signal 
a lack of creativity.

There you go. The research is clear, your desk can never be clean.
Your desk is doomed to spend its life in an eternal loop of 
alternating clean and messy states interspaced 
by periods of procrastination on your part in altering them.
So I guess the only question is..
To clean my desk or not to clean my desk..